In my time I have been called many things: sister, lover, priestess, wise-woman, queen. Now in truth I have come to 
be wise-woman, and a time may come when these things may need to be known. But in sober truth, I think it is the 
Christians who will tell the last tale. For ever the world of Fairy drifts further from the world in which the Christ 
holds sway. I have no quarrel with the Christ, only with his priests, who call the Great Goddess a demon and deny 
that she ever held power in this world. At best, they say that her power was of Satan. Or else they clothe her in the 
blue robe of the Lady of Nazareth-who indeed had power in her way, too-and say that she was ever virgin. But what 
can a virgin know of the sorrows and travail of mankind? 

And now, when the world has changed, and Arthur-my brother, my lover, king who was and king who shall be-lies 
dead (the common folk say sleeping) in the Holy Isle of Avalon, the tale should be told as it was before the priests of 
the White Christ came to cover it all with their saints and legends. 

For, as I say, the world itself has changed. There was a time when a traveller, if he had the will and knew only a few 
of the secrets, could send his barge out into the Summer Sea and arrive not at Glastonbury of the monks, but at the 
Holy Isle of Avalon for at that time the gates between the worlds drifted within the mists, and were open, one to 
another, as the traveller thought and willed. For this is the great secret, which was known to all educated men in our 
day: that by what men think, we create the world around us, daily new. 

And now the priests, thinking that this infringes upon the power of their God, who created the world once and for all 
to be unchanging, have closed those doors (which were never doors, except in the minds of men), and the pathway 
leads only to the priests' Isle, which they have safeguarded with the sound of their church bells, driving away all 
thoughts of another world lying in the darkness. Indeed, they say that world, if it indeed exists, is the property of 
Satan, and the doorway to Hell, if not Hell itself. 

I do not know what their God may or may not have created. In spite of the tales that are told, I never knew much 
about their priests and never wore the black of one of their slave-nuns. If those at Arthur's court at Camelot chose to 
think me so when 1 came there (since I always wore the dark robes of the Great Mother in her guise as wise-woman), 
I did not undeceive them. And indeed, toward the end of Arthur's reign it would have been dangerous to do so, and I 
bowed my head to expediency as my great mistress would never have done: Viviane, Lady of the Lake, once Arthur’s 
greatest friend, save for myself, and then his darkest enemy -again, save for myself. 

But the strife is over; I could greet Arthur at last, when he lay dying, not as my enemy and the enemy of my Goddess, 
but only as my brother, and as a dying man in need of the Mother's aid, where all men come at last. Even the priests 
know this, with their ever- virgin Mary in her blue robe; for she too becomes the World Mother in the hour of death. 
And so Arthur lay at last with his head in my lap, seeing in me neither sister nor lover nor foe, but only wise-woman, 
priestess. Lady of the Lake; and so rested upon the breast of the Great Mother from whom he came to birth and to 
whom at last, as all men, he must go. And perhaps, as I guided the barge which bore him away, not this time to the 
Isle of the Priests, but to the true Holy Isle in the dark world behind our own, that Island of Avalon where, now, few 
but I could go, he repented the enmity that had come between us. 

AS I TELL THIS TALE I will speak at times of things which befell when I was too young to understand them, or of 
things which befell when I was not by; and my hearer will draw away, perhaps, and say: This is her magic. But I have 
always held the gift of the Sight, and of looking within the minds of men and women; and in all this time 1 have been 
close to all of them. And so, at times, all that they thought was known to me in one way or another. And so I will tell 
this tale. 

For one day the priests too will tell it, as it was known to them. Perhaps between the two, some glimmering of the 
truth may be seen. 

For this is the thing the priests do not know, with their One God and One Truth: that there is no such thing as a true 
tale. Truth has many faces and the truth is like to the old road to Avalon; it depends on your own will, and your own 
thoughts, whither the road will take you, and whether, at the end, you arrive in the Holy Isle of Eternity or among the 
priests with their bells and their death and their Satan and Hell and damnation ... but perhaps I am unjust even to 
them. Even the Lady of the Lake, who hated a priest's robe as she would have hated a poisonous viper, and with good 
cause too, chid me once for speaking evil of their God. 

"For all the Gods are one God," she said to me then, as she had said many times before, and as I have said to my own 
novices many times, and as every priestess who comes after me will say again, "and all the Goddesses are one 
Goddess, and there is only one Initiator. And to every man his own truth, and the God within." 

And so, perhaps, the truth winds somewhere between the road to Glastonbury, Isle of the Priests, and the road to 
Avalon, lost forever in the mists of the Summer Sea. 

But this is my truth; I who am Morgaine tell you these things, Morgaine who was in later days called Morgan le Fay. 



Book One 



Mistress of Magic 

i 

Even in high summer, Tintagel was a haunted place; Igraine, Lady of Duke Gorlois, looked out over the sea from the 
headland. As she stared into the fogs and mists, she wondered how she would ever know when the night and day 
were of equal length, so that she could keep the Feast of the New Year. This year the spring storms had been 
unusually violent; night and day the crash of the sea had resounded over the castle until no man or woman within 
could sleep, and even the hounds whimpered mournfully. Tintagel ... there were still those who believed the castle 
had been raised, on the crags at the far end of the long causeway into the sea, by the magic of the ancient folk of Ys. 
Duke Gorlois laughed at this and said that if he had any of their magic, he would have used it to keep the sea from 
encroaching, year by year, upon the shoreline. In the four years since she had come here as Gorlois's bride, Igraine 
had seen land, good land, crumble into the Cornish sea. Long arms of black rock, sharp and craggy, extended into the 
ocean from the coast. When the sun shone, it could be fair and brilliant, the sky and water as brilliant as the jewels 
Gorlois had heaped on her on the day when she told him she bore his first child. But Igraine had never liked wearing 
them. The jewel which hung now at her throat had been given her in Avalon: a moonstone which sometimes reflected 
the blue brilliance of sky and sea; but in the fog, today, even the jewel looked shadowed. 

In the fog, sounds carried a long way. It seemed to Igraine, as she stood looking from the causeway back toward the 
mainland, that she could hear footfalls of horses and mules, and the sound of voices-human voices, here in isolated 
Tintagel, where nothing lived but goats and sheep, and the herdsmen and their dogs, and the ladies of the castle with 
a few serving women and a few old men to guard them. 

Slowly, Igraine turned and went back toward the castle. As always, standing in its shadow, she felt dwarfed by the 
loom of these ancient stones at the end of the long causeway which stretched into the sea. The herdsmen believed that 
the castle had been built by the Ancient Ones from the lost lands of Lyonnesse and Ys; on a clear day, so the 
fishermen said, their old castles could be seen far out under the water. But to Igraine they looked like towers of rock, 
ancient mountains and hills drowned by the ever encroaching sea that nibbled away, even now, at the very crags 
below the castle. Here at the end of the world, where the sea ate endlessly at the land, it was 'easy to believe in 
drowned lands to the west; there were tales of a great fire mountain which had exploded, far to the south, and 
engulfed a great land there. Igraine never knew whether she believed those tales or not. Yes; surely she could hear 
voices in the fog. It could not be savage raiders from over the sea, or from the wild shores of Erin. The time was long 
past when she needed to startle at a strange sound or a shadow. It was not her husband, the Duke; he was far away to 
the North, fighting Saxons at the side of Ambrosius Aurelianus, High King of Britain; he would have sent word if he 
intended to return. 

And she need not fear. If the riders were hostile, the guards and soldiers in the fort at the landward end of the 
causeway, stationed there by Duke Gorlois to guard his wife and child, would have stopped them. It would take an 
army to cut through them. And who would send an army against Tintagel? 

There was a time-Igraine remembered without bitterness, moving slowly into the castle yard-when she would have 
known who rode toward her castle. The thought held little sadness, now. Since Morgaine's birth she no longer even 
wept for her home. And Gorlois was kind to her. He had soothed her through her early fear and hatred, had given her 
jewels and beautiful things, trophies of war, had surrounded her with ladies to wait upon her, and treated her always 
as his equal, except in councils of war. She could have asked no more, unless she had married a man of the Tribes. 
And in this she had been given no choice. A daughter of the Holy Isle must do as was best for her people, whether it 
meant going to death in sacrifice, or laying down her maidenhood in the Sacred Marriage, or marrying where it was 
thought meet to cement alliances; this Igraine had done, marrying a Romanized Duke of Cornwall, a citizen who 
lived, even though Rome was gone from all of Britain, in Roman fashion. 

She shrugged the cloak from her shoulders; inside the court it was warmer, out of the biting wind. And there, as the 
fog swirled and cleared, for a moment a figure stood before her, materialized out of the fog and mist: her half-sister, 
Viviane, the Lady of the Lake, the Lady of the Holy Isle. 

"Sister!" The words wavered, and Igraine knew she had not cried them aloud, but only whispered, her hands flying to 
her breast. "Do I truly see you here?" 

The face was reproachful, and the words seemed to blow away in the sound of the wind beyond the walls. 

Have you given up the Sight, Igraine? Of your free will? 

Stung by the injustice of that, Igraine retorted, "It was you who decreed that 1 must marry Gorlois ... " but the form 
of her sister had wavered into shadows, was not there, had never been there. Igraine blinked; the brief apparition was 
gone. She pulled the cloak around her body, for she was cold, ice cold; she knew the vision had drawn its force from 
the warmth and life of her own body. She thought, 1 didn't know I could still see in that way, I was sure I could not ... 
and then she shivered, knowing that Father Columba would consider this the work of the Devil, and she should 



confess it to him. True, here at the end of the world the priests were lax, but an unconfessed vision would surely be 
treated as a thing unholy. 

She frowned; why should she treat a visit from her own sister as the work of the Devil? Father Columba could say 
what he wished; perhaps his God was wiser than he was. Which, Igraine thought, suppressing a giggle, would not be 
very difficult. Perhaps Father Columba had become a priest of Christ because no college of Druids would have had a 
man so stupid among their ranks. The Christ God seemed not to care whether a priest was stupid or not, so long as he 
could mumble their mass, and read and write a little. She, Igraine herself, had more clerkly skills than Father 
Columba, and spoke better Latin when she wished. Igraine did not think of herself as well educated; she had not had 
the hardihood to study the deeper wisdom of the Old Religion, or to go into the Mysteries any further than was 
absolutely necessary for a daughter of the Holy Isle. Nevertheless, although she was ignorant in any Temple of the 
Mysteries, she could pass among the Romanized barbarians as a well-educated lady. 

In the small room off the court where there was sun on fine days, her younger sister, Morgause, thirteen years old and 
budding, wearing a loose house robe of undyed wool and her old frowsy cloak about her shoulders, was spinning 
listlessly with a drop spindle, taking up her uneven yarn on a wobbly reel. On the floor by the fire, Morgaine was 
rolling an old spindle around for a ball, watching the erratic patterns the uneven cylinder made, knocking it this way 
and that with chubby fingers. 

"Haven't I done enough spinning?" Morgause complained. "My fingers ache! Why must I spin, spin, spin all the time, 
as if I were a waiting-woman?" 

"Every lady must learn to spin," rebuked Igraine as she knew she ought to do, "and your thread is a disgrace, now 
thick, now thin.... Your fingers will lose their weariness as you accustom them to the work. Aching fingers are a sign 
that you have been lazy, since they are not hardened to their task." She took the reel and spindle from Morgause and 
twirled it with careless ease; the uneven yam, under her experienced fingers, smoothed out into a thread of perfectly 
even thickness. "Look, one could weave this yarn without snagging the shuttle ... " and suddenly she tired of 
behaving as she ought. "But you may put the spindle away now; guests will be here before midafternoon." 

Morgause stared at her. "I heard nothing," she said, "nor any rider with a message!" 

"That does not surprise me," Igraine said, "for there was no rider. It was a Sending. Viviane is upon her way here, and 
the Merlin is with her." She had not known that last until she said it. "So you may take Morgaine to her nurse, and go 
and put on your holiday robe, the one dyed with saffron." 

Morgause put away the spindle with alacrity, but paused to stare at Igraine. "My saffron gown? For my sister?" 

Igraine corrected her, sharply. "Not for our sister, Morgause, but for the Lady of the Holy Isle, and for the Messenger 
of the Gods." 

Morgause looked down at the patterned floor. She was a tall, sturdy girl, just beginning to lengthen and ripen into 
womanhood; her thick hair was reddish like Igraine's own, and there were splotches of freckles on her skin, no matter 
how carefully she soaked it in buttermilk and begged the herbwife for washes and simples for it. Already at thirteen 
she was as tall as Igraine, and someday would be taller. She picked up Morgaine with an ill grace and carried her 
away. Igraine called after her, "Tell Nurse to put a holiday gown on the child, and then you may bring her down; 
Viviane has not seen her." 

Morgause said something ill-tempered to the effect that she didn't see why a great priestess would want to see a brat, 
but she said it under her breath so that Igraine had an excuse to ignore it. 

Up the narrow stairs, her own chamber was cold; no fires were lighted there except in the dead of winter. While 
Gorlois was away, she shared the bed with her waiting-woman Gwennis, and his prolonged absence gave her an 
excuse to have Morgaine in her bed at night. Sometimes Morgause slept there too, sharing the fur coverlets against 
the bitter cold. The big marriage bed, canopied, curtained against draughts, was more than big enough for three 
women and a child. 

Gwen, who was old, was drowsing in a comer, and Igraine forbore to wake her, stripping off her workaday dress of 
undyed wool and hurrying on her fine gown, laced at the neck with a silk ribbon Gorlois had brought her as a fairing 
from Londinium. She put on her fingers some little silver rings she had had since she was a little girl ... they would 
go only on her two smallest fingers, now ... and hung a necklace of amber which Gorlois had given her about her 
neck. The gown was dyed rust color, and had an overtunic of green. She found her carven horn comb, and began to 
pull it through her hair, sitting on a bench and working her comb patiently through the tangles. From another room 
she heard a loud yelling and decided that Morgaine was having her hair combed by her nurse and didn’t like it. The 
yelling stopped suddenly, and she supposed that Morgaine had been slapped into silence; or perhaps, as sometimes 
happened when Morgause was in a good temper, Morgause had taken over the combing herself, with her clever, 
patient fingers. This was how Igraine knew that her young sister could spin well enough when she chose, her hands 
were so clever at everything else-at combing, at carding, at making Yule pies. 

Igraine braided her hair, clasped it on top of her head with a gold clasp, and put her good gold brooch into the fold of 
her cloak. She looked at herself in the old bronze mirror her sister Viviane had given her at her wedding, brought, 
they said, all the way from Rome. She knew, lacing her gown, that her breasts were once again as they had been 
before: Morgaine had been weaned a year now, and they were only a little softer and heavier. She knew she had her 
old slimness back, for she had been married in this gown, and now the laces were not strained even a little. 

Gorlois, when he returned, would expect to take her to his bed again. Last time he had seen her, Morgaine had still 
been at the breast, and he had yielded to her plea that she might continue to suckle the child through the summer 
season when so many little children died. She knew he was discontented because the baby had not been the son he 



craved-these Romans counted their lineage through the male line, rather than sensibly through the mother; it was 
silly, for how could any man ever know precisely who had fathered any woman's child? Of course, these Romans 
made a great matter of worrying over who lay with their women, and locked them up and spied on them. Not that 
Igraine needed watching; one man was bad enough, who would want others who might be worse? 

But even though he was eager for a son, Gorlois had been indulgent, letting her have Morgaine in her bed and 
continue to suckle her, even keeping away from her and lying nights with her dressing-woman Ettarr so that she 
would not get with child again and lose her milk. He too knew how many children died if they were weaned before 
they could chew meat and hard bread. Children fed on gruel were sickly, and often there was no goat's milk in the 
summer, even if they would drink it. Children fed on cow's or mare's milk often got the vomit and died, or suffered 
with the flux in their bowels and died. So he had left Morgaine at her breast, thus postponing the son he wanted for at 
least another year and a half. For that at least she would always be grateful to him, and not murmur, however quickly 
he got her with child now. 

Ettarr had gotten herself a belly from that visit, and gone about preening herself; would she be the one to have a son 
by the Duke of Cornwall? Igraine had ignored the girl; Gorlois had other bastard sons, one of whom was with him 
now, in the camp of the war duke, Uther. But Etarr had fallen sick and miscarried, and Igraine had enough intuition 
not to ask Gwen why she looked so pleased at the event. Old Gwen knew too much of herbs for Igraine's perfect 
peace of mind. Some day, she resolved, I will make her tell me exactly what she put into Ettarr's beer. 

She went down to the kitchen, her long skirts trailing on the stone steps. Morgause was there, in her finest gown, and 
she had put Morgaine into a holiday dress, dyed saffron, so that the child looked dark as a Piet. Igraine picked her up, 
holding her with pleasure. Small, dark, delicately made, so small-boned it was like handling a little soft bird. How 
had that child come by her looks? She herself and Morgause were tall and red-haired, earth-colored like all of the 
Tribeswomen, and Gorlois, though dark, was Roman, tall and lean and aquiline; hardened from years of battle against 
the Saxons, too filled with his Roman dignity to show much tenderness to a young wife, and with nothing but 
indifference for the daughter who came in the place of the son she should have borne him. 

But, Igraine reminded herself, these Roman men considered it their divine right to have power of life and death over 
their children. There were many, Christians or no, who would have demanded that a daughter not be reared, so that 
their wives might be free at once to give them a son. Gorlois had been good to her, he had let her keep her daughter. 
Perhaps, though she did not give him credit for much imagination, he knew how she, a woman of the Tribes, felt 
about a daughter. 

While she was giving orders for the entertainment of guests, for wine to be brought up from the cellars and for the 
roasting of meat-not rabbit, but good mutton from the last slaughtering-she heard the squawk and flutter of frightened 
hens in the court and knew that the riders had come across the causeway. The servants looked frightened, but most of 
them had become resigned to the knowledge that the mistress had the Sight. She had pretended it, using clever 
guesses and a few tricks; it was just as well that they should remain in awe of her. Now she thought, Maybe Viviane 
is right, maybe I still have it. Maybe I only believed it was gone-because in those months before Morgaine was bom, 
I felt so weak and powerless. Now I have come back to myself. My mother was a great priestess till the day of her 
death, though she bore several children. 

But, her mind answered her, her mother had borne those children in freedom, as a Tribeswoman should, to such 
fathers as she chose, not as a slave to some Roman whose customs gave him power over women and children. 
Impatiently, she dismissed such thoughts; did it matter whether she had the Sight or only seemed to have it, if it kept 
her servants properly in order? 

She went slowly out to the courtyard, which Gorlois still liked to call the atrium, though it was nothing like the villa 
where he had lived until Ambrosius made him Duke of Cornwall. She found the riders dismounting, and her eyes 
went at once to the only woman among them, a woman smaller than herself and no longer young, wearing a man's 
tunic and woolen breeches, and muffled in cloaks and shawls. Across the courtyard their eyes met in welcome, but 
Igraine went dutifully and bent before the tall, slender old man who was dismounting from a raw-boned mule. He 
wore the blue robes of a bard, and a harp was slung across his shoulder. 

"I bid you welcome to Tintagel, Lord Messenger; you bestow a blessing upon our roof and honor it with your 
presence." 

"I thank you, Igraine," said the resonant voice, and Taliesin, Merlin of Britain, Druid, Bard, clasped his hands before 
his face, then extended them to Igraine in blessing. 

Her duty done for the instant, Igraine flew to her half-sister and would have bent for her blessing too; but Viviane 
bent and prevented her. 

"No, no, child, this is a family visit, time enough later to do me honors if you must ... ." She clasped Igraine close 
and kissed her on the mouth. "And this is the babe? It is easy to see she has the blood of the Old People; she looks 
like our mother, Igraine." 

Viviane, Lady of the Lake and of the Holy Isle, was at this time in her thirties; eldest daughter of the ancient priestess 
of the Lake, she had succeeded to her mother's holy office. She picked up Morgaine in her arms, dandling her with 
the experienced hands of a woman well accustomed to babies. 

"She looks like you," Igraine said, surprised, and then realizing that she should have realized this before. But it had 
been four years since she had seen Viviane, and then at her wedding. So much had happened, she had changed so 
much, since, a frightened girl of fifteen, she had been given into the hands of a man more than twice her age. "But 
come into the hall. Lord Merlin, sister. Come into the warm." 



Freed of her enwrapping cloaks and shawls, V iviane. Lady of Avalon, was a surprisingly little woman, no taller than 
a well-grown girl of eight or ten. In her loose tunic with its wrapped belt, a knife sheathed at her waist, and bulky 
woolen breeches, legs wrapped with thick leggings, she looked tiny, a child put into adult clothes. Her face was 
small, swarthy and triangular, the forehead low beneath hair dark as the shadows beneath the crags. Her eyes were 
dark, too, and large in her small face; Igraine had never realized how small she was. 

A serving-woman brought the guest cup: hot wine, mixed with the last of the spices Gorlois had had sent to her from 
the markets in Londinium. Viviane took it between her hands, and Igraine blinked at her; with the gesture with which 
she took the cup, she was suddenly tall and imposing; it might have been the sacred chalice of the Holy Regalia. She 
set it between her hands and brought it slowly to her lips, murmuring a blessing. She tasted it, turned, and laid it in 
the hands of the Merlin. He took it with a grave bow and put it to his lips. Igraine, who had barely entered the 
Mysteries, somehow felt that she too was part of this beautiful ritual solemnity as in turn she took the cup from her 
guests, tasted it, and spoke formal words of welcome. 

Then she put the cup aside and her sense of the moment dropped away; Viviane was only a small, tired-looking 
woman, the Merlin no more than a stooped old man. Igraine led them both quickly to the fire. 

"It is a long journey from the shores of the Summer Sea in these days," she said, remembering when she had travelled 
it, a new-made bride, frightened and silently hating, in the train of the strange husband who, as yet, was only a voice 
and a terror in the night. "What brings you here in the spring storms, my sister and my lady?" 

And why could you not have come before, why did you leave me all alone, to learn to be a wife, to bear a child alone 
and in fear and homesickness? And since you could not have come before, why do you come at all, when it is too late 
and I am at last resigned into submission? 

"The distance is indeed long," Viviane said softly, and Igraine knew that the priestess had heard, as she always heard, 
the unspoken words as well as what Igraine had said. "And these are dangerous times, child. But you have grown into 
womanhood in these years, even if they have been lonely, as lonely as the years of isolation for the making of a bard- 
or," she added, with the flicker of a reminiscent smile, "the making of a priestess. Had you chosen that path, you 
would have found it equally lonely, my Igraine. Yes, of course," she said, reaching down, her face softening, "you 
may come up on my lap, little one." She picked up Morgaine, and Igraine watched with wonder; Morgaine was, 
ordinarily, as shy as a wild rabbit. Half resentful, half falling again under the old spell, she watched the child settle 
into Viviane's lap. Viviane looked almost too small to hold her securely. A fairy woman, indeed; a woman of the Old 
People. And indeed Morgaine would perhaps be very like her. 

"And Morgause, how has she prospered since I sent her to you a year ago?" Viviane said, looking up at Morgause in 
her saffron gown, where she hung back resentfully in the shadows of the fire. "Come and kiss me, little sister. Ah, 
you will be tall like Igraine," she said, raising her arms to embrace the girl, who came, sullen as a half-trained puppy, 
from the shadows. "Yes, sit there at my knee if you want to, child." Morgause sat on the floor, leaning her head 
against Viviane's lap, and Igraine saw that the sulky eyes were filled with tears. 

She has us all in her hand. How can she have such power over us all? Or is it that she is the only mother Morgause 
has ever known? She was a grown woman when Morgause was born, she has always been mother, as well as sister, 
to both of us. Their mother, who had been really too old for childbearing, had died giving birth to Morgause. Viviane 
had borne a child of her own, earlier in the year; her child had died, and Viviane had taken Morgause to nurse. 
Morgaine had snuggled tightly into Viviane's lap; Morgause leaned her silky red head on Viviane's knee. The 
priestess held the little one with one arm while her free hand stroked the half-grown girl's long, silky hair. 

"I would have come to you when Morgaine was born," Viviane said, "but I was pregnant, too. I bore a son that year. I 
have put him out to nurse, and I think his foster-mother may send him to the monks. She is a Christian." 

"Don't you mind his being reared as a Christian?" Morgause asked. "Is he pretty? What is his name?" 

Viviane laughed. "I called him Balan," she said, "and his foster-mother named her son Balin. They are only ten days 
apart in age, so they will be reared as twins, no doubt. And no, I do not mind that he is reared a Christian, his father 
was so, and Priscilla is a good woman. You said the journey here was long; believe me, child, it is longer now than it 
was when you were wedded to Gorlois. Not longer, perhaps, from the Isle of the Priests, where their Holy Thorn 
grows, but longer, far longer, from Avalon ..." 

"And that is why we came here," said the Merlin suddenly, and his voice was like the tolling of a great bell, so that 
Morgaine sat up suddenly and began to whimper in fright. 

"I do not understand," said Igraine, suddenly uneasy. "Surely the two lie close together ... ." 

"The two are one," said the Merlin, sitting very erect, "but the followers of Christ have chosen to say, not that they 
shall have no other Gods before their God, but that there is no other God save for their God; that he alone made the 
world, that he rules it alone, that he alone made the stars and the whole of creation. " 

Igraine quickly made the holy sign against blasphemy. 

"But that cannot be," she insisted. "No single God can rule all things ... and what of the Goddess? What of the 
Mother ... ?" 

"They believe," said Viviane, in her smooth low voice, "that there is no Goddess; for the principle of woman, so they 
say, is the principle of all evil; through woman, so they say. Evil entered this world; there is some fantastic Jewish 
tale about an apple and a snake. " 

"The Goddess will punish them," Igraine said, shaken. "And yet you married me to one of them?" 

"We did not know that their blasphemy was so all-encompassing," 

Merlin said, "for there have been followers of other Gods in our time. But they respected the Gods of others." 



"But what has this to do with the length of the road from Avalon?" asked Igraine. 

"We come, then, to the reason for our visit," said the Merlin, "for, as the Druids know, it is the belief of mankind 
which shapes the world, and all of reality. Long ago, when the followers of Christ first came to our isle, I knew that 
this was a powerful pivot in time, a moment to change the world." 

Morgause looked up at the old man, her eyes wide in awe. 

"Are you so old. Venerable One?" 

The Merlin smiled down at the girl and said, "Not in my own body. But I have read much in the great hall which is 
not in this world, there the Record of All Things is written. And also, I was living then. Those who are the Lords of 
this world permitted me to come back, but in another body of flesh." 

"These matters are too abstruse for the little one. Venerable Father," Viviane said, gently rebuking him. "She is not a 
priestess. What the Merlin means, little sister, is that he was living when the Christians first came here, and that he 
chose, and was allowed, to reincarnate at once, to follow his work through. These are Mysteries, which you need not 
try to understand. Father, go on." 

"I knew that this was one of those moments where the history of all mankind would be changed," the Merlin said. 
"The Christians seek to blot out all wisdom save their own; and in that strife they are banishing from this world all 
forms of mystery save that which will fit into their religious faith. They have pronounced it a heresy that men live 
more than one life -which every peasant knows to be true-" 

"But if men do not believe in more than one life," Igraine protested, shaken, "how will they avoid despair? What just 
God would create some men wretched, and others happy and prosperous, if one life were all that they could have?" 

"I do not know," said the Merlin. "Perhaps they wish men to despair at the harshness of fate, so that they may come 
on their knees to the Christ who will take them to heaven. I do not know what the followers of Christ believe, or what 
they hope for. "His eyes were closed for a moment, the lines of his face bitter. "But whatever it is that they believe, 
the views they hold are altering this world; not only in the spirit, but on the material plane. As they deny the world of 
the spirit, and the realms of Avalon, so those realms cease to exist for them. They still exist, of course; but not in the 
same world with the world of the followers of Christ. Avalon, the Holy Isle, is now no longer the same island as the 
Glastonbury where we of the Old Faith once allowed the monks to build their chapel and their monastery. For our 
wisdom and their wisdom-how much do you know of natural philosophy, Igraine?" 

"Very little," said the young woman, shaken, looking at the priestess and the great Druid. "I have never been taught." 
"A pity," said the Merlin, "for you must understand this, Igraine. I will try to make it simple for you. Look you," he 
said, and took the gold torque from his throat, then drew his dagger. "Can I put this bronze and this gold into the 
same place, at once?" 

She blinked and stared, not understanding. "No, of course not. They can be side by side, but not in the same place 
unless you move one of them first." 

"And so it is with the Holy Isle," said Merlin. "The priests swore an oath to us, four hundreds of years ago, before 
even the Romans came here and tried to conquer, that they would never rise against us and drive us forth with 
weapons; for we were here before them, and then they were suppliants, and weak. And they have honored that oath- 
so much I must give to them. But in spirit, in their prayers, they have never ceased to strive with us for their God to 
drive away our Gods, their wisdom to rule over our wisdom. In our world, Igraine, there is room enough for many 
Gods and many Goddesses. But in the universe of the Christians-how can I say this?-there is no room for our vision 
or our wisdom. In their world there is one God alone; not only must he conquer over all Gods, he must make it as if 
there were no other Gods, had never been any Gods but only false idols, the work of their Devil. So that, believing in 
him, all men may be saved in this one life. This is what they believe. And as men believe, so their world goes. And so 
the worlds which once were one are drifting apart. 

"There are now two Britains, Igraine: their world under their One God and the Christ; and, beside it and behind it, the 
world where the Great Mother still rules, the world where the Old People have chosen to live and worship. This has 
happened before. There was the time when the fairy folk, the Shining Ones, withdrew from our world, going further 
and further into the mists, so that only an occasional wanderer now can spend a night within the elf-mounds, and if he 
should do so, time drifts on without him, and he may come out after a single night and find that his kinfolk are all 
dead and that a dozen years have gone by. And now, I tell you, Igraine, it is happening again. Our world-ruled by the 
Goddess and the Horned One, her consort, the world you know, the world of many truths-is being forced away from 
the mainstream course of time. Even now, Igraine, if a traveller sets out with no guide for the Isle of Avalon, unless 
he know the way very well, he cannot come there, but will find only the Isle of the Priests. To most men, our world is 
now lost in the mists of the Summer Sea. Even before the Romans left us, this was beginning to happen; now, as 
churches cover the whole of Britain, our world grows further and further away. That is why it took us so long to 
come here; fewer and fewer of the cities and roads of the Old People remain for our guide. The worlds still touch, 
still lie upon one another, close as lovers; but they are drifting apart, and if they are not stopped, one day there will be 
two worlds, and none can come and go between the two-" 

"Let them go!" interrupted Viviane angrily. "I still think we should let them go! 1 do not want to live in a world of 
Christians, who deny the Mother-" 

"But what of all the others, what of those who will live in despair?" The Merlin's voice was like a great soft bell 
again. "No, a pathway must remain, even if it is secret. Parts of the world are still one. The Saxons raid in both 
worlds, but more and more of our warriors are followers of Christ. The Saxons-" 

"The Saxons are barbarians, and cruel," said Viviane. "The Tribes alone cannot drive them from these shores, and the 



Merlin and I have seen that Ambrosius is not long for this world, and that his war duke, the Pendragon-is it Uther 
they call him?-will succeed him. But there are many in this country who will not rally to the Pendragon. Whatever 
may befall our world in the spirit, neither of our worlds can long survive the fire and sword of the Saxons. Before we 
can fight the spiritual battle which will keep the worlds from moving further apart, we must save the very heart of 
Britain from being ravaged by Saxon fires. Not only the Saxons assault us, but Jutes, Scots, all the wild folk who are 
moving down from the North. Every place, even Rome itself, is being overpowered; there are so many of them. Your 
husband has been fighting all his life. Ambrosius, Duke of Britain, is a good man, but he can command loyalty only 
from those who once followed Rome; his father wore the purple, and Ambrosius too was ambitious to be emperor. 
But we must have a leader who will appeal to all the folk of Britain." 

"But-Rome remains," Igraine protested. "Gorlois told me that when Rome had overcome her troubles in the Great 
City, the legions would return! Can we not look to Rome for help against the wild folk from the North? The Romans 
were the greatest fighters of the world, they built the great wall to the North to hold back the wild raiders-" 

Merlin's voice took on the empty sound that was like the tolling of a great bell. "I have seen it in the Holy Well," he 
said. "The Eagle has flown, and shall never return to Britain." 

"Rome can do nothing," Viviane said. "We must have our own leader, one who can command all of Britain. 
Otherwise, when they mass against us, all Britain will fall, and for hundreds and hundreds of years, we will lie in 
ruins beneath the Saxon barbarians. The worlds will drift irrevocably apart and the memory of Avalon will not 
remain even in legend, to give hope to mankind. No, we must have a leader who can command loyalty from all the 
people of both the Britains-the Britain of the priests, and the world of the mists, ruled from Avalon. Healed by this 
Great King"-her voice took on the clear, mystical ring of prophecy- "the worlds shall once again come together, a 
world with room for the Goddess and for the Christ, the cauldron and the cross. And this leader shall make us one." 
"But where shall we find such a king?" Igraine asked. "Who shall give us such a leader?" 

And then, suddenly, she was afraid, felt ice pouring down her back, as the Merlin and the priestess turned to look at 
her, their eyes seeming to hold her motionless as a small bird under the shadow of a great hawk, and she understood 
why the messenger-prophet of the Druids was called the Merlin. 

But when Viviane spoke her voice was very soft. 

She said, "You. Igraine. You shall bear this Great King." 



There was silence in the room, except for the small crackle of the fire. At last Igraine heard herself draw a long 
breath, as if she had just wakened from sleep. "What is this that you are telling me? Do you mean that Gorlois is to be 
the father of this Great King?" She heard the words echoing in her mind and ringing there, and wondered why she 
had never suspected Gorlois of so great a destiny. She saw her sister and the Merlin exchange glances, and saw, too, 
the small gesture with which the priestess silenced the old man. 

"No, Lord Merlin, a woman must say this to a woman ... . Igraine, Gorlois is Roman. The Tribes will not follow any 
man born to a son of Rome. The High King they follow must be a child of the Holy Isle, a true son of the Goddess. 
Your son, Igraine, yes. But it is not the Tribes alone that will fight away the Saxons and the other wild folk from the 
North. We will need the support of Romans and Celts and Cymry, and they will follow only their own war duke, their 
Pendragon, son of a man they trust to lead them and rule. And the Old People, too, who seek the son of a royal 
mother. Your son, Igraine-but the father will be Uther Pendragon." 
