A SIGN IN SPACE 

Situated in the external zone of the Milky Way, the Sun takes about two hundred million 
years to make a complete revolution of the Galaxy. 

Right, that's how long it takes, not a day less, — Qfwfq said, — once, as I went 
past, I drew a sign at a point in space, just so I could find it again two hundred million 
years later, when we went by the next time around. What sort of sign? It' s hard to explain 
because if I say sign to you, you immediately think of a something that can be 
distinguished from a something else, but nothing could be distinguished from anything 
there; you immediately think of a sign made with some implement or with your hands, 
and then when you take the implement or your hands away, the sign remains, but in those 
days there were no implements or even hands, or teeth, or noses, all things that came 
along afterwards, a long time afterwards. As to the form a sign should have, you say it's 
no problem because, whatever form it may be given, a sign only has to serve as a sign, 
that is, be different or else the same as other signs: here again it' s easy for you young ones 
to talk, but in that period I didn't have any examples to follow, I couldn't say I'll make it 
the same or I'll make it different, there were no things to copy, nobody knew what a line 
was, straight or curved, or even a dot, or a protuberance or a cavity. I conceived the idea 
of making a sign, that's true enough, or rather, I conceived the idea of considering a sign a 
something that I felt like making, so when, at that point in space and not in another, I 
made something, meaning to make a sign, it turned out that I really had made a sign, after 
all. 

In other words, considering it was the first sign ever made in the universe, or at 
least in the circuit of the Milky Way, I must admit it came out very well. Visible? What a 
question! Who had eyes to see with in those days? Nothing had ever been seen by 




anything, the question never even arose. Recognizable, yes, beyond any possibility of 
error: because all the other points in space were the same, indistinguishable, and instead, 
this one had the sign on it. 

So as the planets continued their revolutions, and the solar system went on in its 
own, I soon left the sign far behind me, separated from it by the endless fields of space. 
And I couldn’t help thinking about when I would come back and encounter it again, and 
how I would know it, and how happy it would make me, in that anonymous expanse, 
after I had spent a hundred thousand light-years without meeting anything familiar, 
nothing for hundreds of centuries, for thousands of millennia; I'd come back and there it 
would be in its place, just as I had left it, simple and bare, but with that unmistakable 
imprint, so to speak, that I had given it. 

Slowly the Milky Way revolved, with its fringe of constellations and planets and 
clouds, and the Sun along with the rest, toward the edge. In all that circling, only the sign 
remained still, in an ordinary spot, out of all the orbit' s reach (to make it, I had leaned 
over the border of the Galaxy a little, so it would remain outside and all those revolving 
worlds wouldn't crash into it), in an ordinary point that was no longer ordinary since it 
was the only point that was surely there, and which could be used as a reference point to 
distinguish other points. 

I thought about it day and night; in fact, I couldn't think about anything else; 
actually, this was the first opportunity I had had to think something; or I should say: to 
think something had never been possible, first because there were no things to think 
about, and second because signs to think of them by were lacking, but from the moment 
there was that sign, it was possible for someone thinking to think of a sign, and therefore 
that one, in the sense that the sign was the thing you could think about and also the sign 
of the thing thought, namely, itself. 

So the situation was this: the sign served to mark a place but at the same time it 
meant that in that place there was a sign (something far more important because there 
were plenty of places but there was only one sign) and also at the same time that sign was 
mine, the sign of me, because it was the only sign I had ever made and I was the only one 
who had ever made signs. It was like a name, the name of that point, and also my name 
that I had signed on that spot; in short, it was the only name available for everything that 
required a name. 

Transported by the sides of the Galaxy, our world went navigating through distant 
spaces, and the sign stayed where I had left it to mark that spot, and at the same time it 
marked me, I carried it with me, it inhabited me, possessed me entirely, came between me 
and everything with which I might have attempted to establish a relationship. As I waited 
to come back and meet it again, I could try to derive other signs from it and combinations 
of signs, series of similar signs and contrasts of different signs. But already tens and tens 
of thousands of millennia had gone by since the moment when I had made it (rather, since 
the few seconds in which I had scrawled it down in the constant movement of the Milky 
Way) and now, just when I needed to bear in mind its every detail (the slightest 
uncertainty about its form made uncertain the possible distinctions between it and other 
signs I might make), I realized that, though I recalled its general outline, its over-all 
appearance, still something about it eluded me, I mean if I tried to break it down into its 
various elements, I couldn’t remember whether, between one part and the other, it went 
like this or like that. I needed it there in front of me, to study, to consult, but instead it 




was still far away, I didn't yet know how far, because I had made it precisely in order to 
know the time it would take me to see it again, and until I had found it once more, I 
wouldn't know. Now, however, it wasn't my motive in making it that mattered to me, but 
how it was made, and I started inventing hypotheses about this how, and theories 
according to which a certain sign had to be perforce in a certain way, or else, proceeding 
by exclusion, I tried to eliminate all the less probable types of sign to arrive at the right 
one, but all these imaginary signs vanished inevitably because that first sign was missing 
as a term of comparison. As I racked my brain like this (while the Galaxy went on tuming 
wakefully in its bed of soft emptiness and the atoms burned and radiated) I realized I had 
lost by now even that confused notion of my sign, and I succeeded in conceiving only 
interchangeable fragments of signs, that is, smaller signs within the large one, and every 
change of these signs-within-the-sign changed the sign itself into a completely different 
one; in short, I had completely forgotten what my sign was like and, try as I might, it 
wouldn't come back to my mind. 

Did I despair? No, this forgetfulness was annoying, but not irreparable. Whatever 
happened, I knew the sign was there waiting for me, quiet and still. I would arrive, I 
would find it again, and I would then be able to pick up the thread of my meditations. At 
a rough guess, I calculated we had completed half of our galactic revolution: I had only to 
be patient, the second half always seemed to go by more quickly. Now I just had to 
remember the sign existed and I would pass it again. 

Day followed day, and then I knew I must be near. I was furiously impatient 
because I might encounter the sign at any moment. It' s here, no, a little farther on, now I'll 
count up to a hundred. . . Had it disappeared? Had we already gone past it? I didn't know. 
My sign had perhaps remained who knows where, behind, completely remote from the 
revolutionary orbit of our system. I hadn't calculated the oscillations to which, especially 
in those days, the celestial bodies' fields of gravity were subject, and which caused them 
to trace irregular orbits, cut like the flower of a dahlia. For about a hundred millennia I 
tormented myself, going over my calculations: it turned out that our course touched that 
spot not every galactic year but only every three, that is, every six hundred million solar 
years. When you've waited two hundred million years, you can also wait six hundred; and 
I waited; the way was long but I wasn't on foot, after all; astride the Galaxy I traveled 
through the light-years, galloping over the planetary and stellar orbits as if I were on a 
horse whose shoes struck sparks; I was in a state of mounting excitement; I felt I was 
going forth to conquer the only thing that mattered to me, sign and dominion and name. . 

I made the second circuit, the third. I was there. I let out a yell. At a point which 
had to be that very point, in the place of my sign, there was a shapeless scratch, a bruised, 
chipped abrasion of space. I had lost everything: the sign, the point, the thing that caused 
me — being the one who had made the sign at that point — to be me. Space, without a 
sign, was once again a chasm, the void, without beginning or end, nauseating, in which 
everything — including me — was lost. (And don't come telling me that, to fix a point, my 
sign and the erasure of my sign amounted to the same thing; the erasure was the negation 
of the sign, and therefore didn’t serve to distinguish one point from the preceding and 
successive points.) 

I was disheartened and for many light-years I let myself be dragged along as if I 
were unconscious. When I finally raised my eyes (in the meanwhile, sight had begun in 




our world, and, as a result, also life), I saw what I would never have expected to see. I 
saw it, the sign, but not that one, a similar sign, a sign unquestionably copied from mine, 
but one I realized immediately couldn't be mine, it was so squat and careless and clumsily 
pretentious, a wretched counterfeit of what I had meant to indicate with that sign whose 
ineffable purity I could only now — through contrast — recapture. Who had played this 
trick on me? I couldn't figure it out. Finally, a plurimillennial chain of deductions led me 
to the solution: on another planetary system which perfonned its galactic revolution 
before us, there was a certain Kgwgk (the name I deduced afterwards, in the later era of 
names), a spiteful type, consumed with envy, who had erased my sign in a vandalistic 
impulse and then, with vulgar artifice, had attempted to make another. 

It was clear that his sign had nothing to mark except Kgwgk's intention to imitate 
my sign, which was beyond all comparison. But at that moment the determination not to 
let my rival get the better of me was stronger than any other desire: I wanted immediately 
to make a new sign in space, a real sign that would make Kgwgk die of envy. About 
seven hundred millions of years had gone by since I had first tried to make a sign, but I 
fell to work with a will. Now things were different, however, because the world, as I 
mentioned, was beginning to produce an image of itself, and in everything a form was 
beginning to correspond to a function, and the forms of that time, we believed, had a long 
future ahead of them (instead, we were wrong: take — to give you a fairly recent example 
— the dinosaurs), and therefore in this new sign of mine you could perceive the influence 
of our new way of looking at things, call it style if you like, that special way that 
everything had to be, there, in a certain fashion. I must say I was traly satisfied with it, 
and I no longer regretted that first sign that had been erased, because this one seemed 
vastly more beautiful to me. 

But in the duration of that galactic year we already began to realize that the 
world's forms had been temporary up until then, and that they would change, one by one. 
And this awareness was accompanied by a certain annoyance with the old images, so that 
even their memory was intolerable. I began to be tormented by a thought: I had left that 
sign in space, that sign which had seemed so beautiful and original to me and so suited to 
its function, and which now, in my memory, seemed inappropriate, in all its pretension, a 
sign chiefly of an antiquated way of conceiving signs and of my foolish acceptance of an 
order of things I ought to have been wise enough to break away from in time. In other 
words, I was ashamed of that sign which went on through the centuries, being passed by 
worlds in flight, making a ridiculous spectacle of itself and of me and of that temporary 
way we had had of seeing things. I blushed when I remembered it (and I remembered it 
constantly), blushes that lasted whole geological eras: to hide my shame I crawled into 
the craters of the volcanoes, in remorse I sank my teeth into the caps of the glaciations 
that covered the continents. I was tortured by the thought that Kgwgk, always preceding 
me in the circumnavigation of the Milky Way, would see the sign before I could erase it, 
and boor that he was, he would mock me and make fun of me, contemptuously repeating 
the sign in rough caricatures in every corner of the circum-galactic sphere. 

Instead, this time the complicated astral timekeeping was in my favor. Kgwgk's 
constellation didn't encounter the sign, whereas our solar system turned up there 
punctually at the end of the first revolution, so close that I was able to erase the whole 
thing with the greatest care. 

Now, there wasn't a single sign of mine in space. I could start drawing another, 




but I knew that signs also allow others to judge the one who makes them, and that in the 
course of a galactic year tastes and ideas have time to change, and the way of regarding 
the earlier ones depends on what comes afterwards; in short, I was afraid a sign that now 
might seem perfect to me, in two hundred or six hundred million years would make me 
look absurd. Instead, in my nostalgia, the first sign, brutally rubbed out by Kgwgk, 
remained beyond the attacks of time and its changes, the sign created before the 
beginning of forms, which was to contain something that would have survived all forms, 
namely the fact of being a sign and nothing else. 

Making signs that weren't that sign no longer held any interest for me; and I had 
forgotten that sign now, billions of years before. So, unable to make true signs, but 
wanting somehow to annoy Kgwgk, I started making false signs, notches in space, holes, 
stains, little tricks that only an incompetent creature like Kgwgk could mistake for signs. 
And still he furiously got rid of them with his erasings (as I could see in later 
revolutions), with a determination that must have cost him much effort. (Now I scattered 
these false signs liberally through space, to see how far his simple-mindedness would 
go.) 

Observing these erasures, one circuit after the next (the Galaxy's revolutions had 
now become for me a slow, boring voyage without goal or expectation), I realized 
something: as the galactic years passed the erasures tended to fade in space, and beneath 
them what I had drawn at those points, my false signs — as I called them — began to 
reappear. This discovery, far from displeasing me, filled me with new hope. If Kgwgk's 
erasures were erased, the first he had made, there at that point, must have disappeared by 
now, and my sign must have returned to its pristine visibility! 

So expectation was revived, to lend anxiety to my days. The Galaxy tumed like an 
omelet in its heated pan, itself both frying pan and golden egg; and I was frying, with it, 
in my impatience. 

But, with the passing of the galactic years, space was no longer that uniformly 
barren and colorless expanse. The idea of fixing with signs the points where we passed — 
as it had come to me and to Kgwgk — had occurred to many, scattered over billions of 
planets of other solar systems, and I was constantly running into one of these things, or a 
pair, or even a dozen, simple two-dimensional scrawls, or else three-dimensional solids 
(polyhedrons, for example), or even things constructed with more care, with the fourth 
dimension and everything. So it happened that I reached the point of my sign, and I found 
five, all there. And I wasn’t able to recognize my own. It' s this one, no, that; no, no, that 
one seems too modern, but it could also be the most ancient; I don’t recognize my hand in 
that one, I would never have wanted to make it like that. . . And meanwhile the Galaxy 
ran through space and left behind those signs old and new and I still hadn't found mine. 

I'm not exaggerating when I say that the galactic years that followed were the 
worst I had ever lived through. I went on looking, and signs kept growing thicker in 
space; from all the worlds anybody who had an opportunity invariably left his mark in 
space somehow; and our world, too, every time I turned, I found more crowded, so that 
world and space seemed the mirror of each other, both minutely adorned with 
hieroglyphics and ideograms, each of which might be a sign and might not be: a 
calcareous concretion on basalt, a crest raised by the wind on the clotted sand of the 
desert, the arrangement of the eyes in a peacock's tail (gradually, living among signs had 
led us to see signs in countless things that, before, were there, marking nothing but their 




own presence; they had been transformed into the sign of themselves and had been added 
to the series of signs made on purpose by those who meant to make a sign), the fire- 
streaks against a wall of schistose rock, the four-hundred-and-twenty-seventh groove — 
slightly crooked — of the cornice of a tomb's pediment, a sequence of streaks on a video 
during a thunderstorm (the series of signs was multiplied in the series of the signs of 
signs, of signs repeated countless times always the same and always somehow different 
because to the purposely made sign you had to add the sign that had happened there by 
chance), the badly inked tail of the letter R in an evening newspaper joined to a thready 
imperfection in the paper, one among the eight hundred thousand flakings of a tarred wall 
in the Melbourne docks, the curve of a graph, a skid-mark on the asphalt, a chromosome. 

. . Every now and then I'd start: that's the one! And for a second I was sure I had 
rediscovered my sign, on the Earth or in space, it made no difference, because through 
the signs a continuity had been established with no precise boundaries any more. 

In the universe now there was no longer a container and a thing contained, but 
only a general thickness of signs superimposed and coagulated, occupying the whole 
volume of space; it was constantly being dotted, minutely, a network of lines and 
scratches and reliefs and engravings; the universe was scrawled over on all sides, along 
all its dimensions. There was no longer any way to establish a point of reference: the 
Galaxy went on turning but I could no longer count the revolutions, any point could be 
the point of departure, any sign heaped up with the others could be mine, but discovering 
it would have served no purposc, because it was clear that, independent of signs, space 
didn't exist and perhaps had never existed. 
