The planets of the solar system, G. P. Kuiper explains, began to solidify in the darkness, 
through the condensation of a fluid, shapeless nebula. All was cold and dark. Later the 
Sun began to become more concentrated until it was reduced almost to its present 
dimensions, and in this process the temperature rose and rose, to thousands of degrees, 
and the Sun started emitting radiations in space. 

Pitch-dark it was, — old Qfwfq confirmed, — I was only a child, I can barely 
remember it. We were there, as usual, with Father and Mother, Granny Bb'b, some uncles 
and aunts who were visiting, Mr. Hnw, the one who later became a horse, and us little 
ones. I think I've told you before the way we lived on the nebulae: it was like lying down, 
we were flat and very still, turning as they turned. Not that we were lying outside, you 
understand, on the nebula's surface; no, it was too cold out there. We were underneath, as 
if we had been tucked in under a layer of fluid, grainy matter. There was no way of telling 
time; whenever we started counting the nebula's turns there were disagreements, because 




we didn’t have any reference points in the darkness, and we ended up arguing. So we 
preferred to let the centuries flow by as if they were minutes; there was nothing to do but 
wait, keep covered as best we could, doze, speak out now and then to make sure we were 
all still there; and, naturally, scratch ourselves; because — they can say what they like — 
all those particles spinning around had only one effect, a troublesome itching. 

What we were waiting for, nobody could have said; to be sure, Granny Bb'b 
remembered back to the times when matter was uniformly scattered in space, and there 
was heat and light; even allowing for all the exaggerations there must have been in those 
old folks' tales, those times had surely been better in some ways, or at least different; but 
as far as we were concemed, we just had to get through that enormous night. 

My sister G'd(w) n fared the best, thanks to her introverted nature: she was a shy 
girl and she loved the dark. For herself, G'd(w) n always chose to stay in places that were a 
bit removed, at the edge of the nebula, and she would contemplate the blackness, and toy 
with the little grains of dust in tiny cascades, and talk to herself, with faint bursts of 
laughter that were like tiny cascades of dust, and — waking or sleeping — she abandoned 
herself to dreams. They weren't dreams like ours (in the midst of the darkness, we 
dreamed of more darkness, because nothing else came into our minds); no, she dreamed 
— from what we could understand of her ravings — of a darkness a hundred times deeper 
and more various and velvety. 

My father was the first to notice something was changing. i had dozed off, when 
his shout wakened me: "Watch out! We're hitting something!" 

Beneath us, the nebula's matter, instead of fluid as it had always been, was 
beginning to condense. 

To tell the tmth, my mother had been tossing and turning for several hours, 
saying: "Uff, i just can't seem to make myself comfortable here!" in other words, 
according to her, she had become aware of a change in the place where she was lying: the 
dust wasn't the same as it had been before, soft, elastic, uniform, so you could wallow in 
it as much as you liked without leaving any print; instead, a kind of mt or furrow was 
being fonned, especially where she was accustomed to resting all her weight. And she 
thought she could feel underneath her something like granules or blobs or bumps; which 
perhaps, after all, were buried hundreds of miles farther down and were pressing through 
all those layers of soft dust. Not that we generally paid much attention to these 
premonitions of my mother's: poor thing, for a hypersensitive creature like herself, and 
already well along in years, our way of life then was hardly ideal for the nerves. 

And then it was my brother Rwzfs, an infant at the time; at a certain point I felt 
him — who knows? — slamming or digging or writhing in some way, and I asked: "What 
are you doing?" And he said: "I'm playing." 

"Playing? With what?" 

"With a thing," he said. 

You understand? It was the first time. There had never been things to play with 
before. And how could we have played? With that pap of gaseous matter? Some fun: that 
sort of stuff was all right perhaps for my sister G'd(w) n . If Rwzfs was playing, it meant he 
had found something new: in fact, afterwards, exaggerating as usual, they said he had 
found a pebble. It wasn't a pebble, but it was surely a collection of more solid matter or — 
let' s say — something less gaseous. He was never very clear on this point; that is, he told 
stories, as they occurred to him, and when the period came when nickel was formed and 




nobody talked of anything but nickel, he said: "That' s it: it was nickel. I was playing with 
some nickel!" So afterwards he was always called "Nickel Rwzfs." (It wasn't, as some 
say now, that he had turned into nickel, unable — retarded as he was — to go beyond the 
mineral phase; it was a different thing altogether, and I only mention this out of love for 
tmth, not because he was my brother: he had always been a bit backward, tme enough, 
but not of the metallic type, if anything a bit colloidal; in fact, when he was still very 
young, he married an alga, one of the first, and we never heard firom him again.) 

In short, it seemed everyone had felt something: except me. Maybe it's because 
I'm absent-minded. I heard — I don't know whether awake or asleep — our father's cry: 
"We're hitting something!," a meaningless expression (since before then nothing had ever 
hit anything, you can be sure), but one that took on meaning at the very moment it was 
uttered, that is, it meant the sensation we were beginning to experience, slightly 
nauseating, like a slab of mud passing under us, something flat, on which we felt we were 
bouncing. And I said, in a reproachful tone: "Oh, Granny!" 

Afterwards I often asked myself why my first reaction was to become angry with 
our grandmother. Granny Bb'b, who clung to her habits of the old days, often did 
embarrassing things: she continued to believe that matter was in unifonn expansion and, 
for example, that it was enough to throw refuse anywhere and it would rarefy and 
disappear into the distance. The fact that the process of condensation had begun some 
while ago, that is, that dirt thickened on particles so we weren't able to get rid of it — she 
couldn't get this into her head. So in some obscure way I connected this new fact of 
"hitting" with some mistake my grandmother might have made and I let out that cry. 

Then Granny Bb'b answered: "What is it? Have you found my cushion?" 

This cushion was a little ellipsoid of galactic matter Granny had found somewhere 
or other during the first cataclysms of the universe; and she always carried it around with 
her, to sit on. At a certain point, during the great night, it had been lost, and she accused 
me of having hidden it firom her. Now, it was true I had always hated that cushion, it 
seemed so vulgar and out of place on our nebula, but the most Granny could blame me 
for was not having guarded it always as she had wanted me to. 

Even my father, who was always very respectful toward her, couldn't help 
remarking: "Oh see here, Mamma, something is happening — we don’t know what — and 
you go on about that cushion!" 

"Ah, I told you I couldn't get to sleep!" my mother said: another remark hardly 
appropriate to the situation. 

At that point we heard a great "Pwack! Wack! Sgrr!" and we realized that 
something must have happened to Mr. Hnw: he was hawking and spitting for all he was 
worth. 

"Mr. Hnw! Mr. Hnw! Get hold of yourself! Where's he got to now?" my father 
started saying, and in that darkness, still without a ray of light, we managed to grope until 
we found him and could hoist him onto the surface of the nebula, where he caught his 
breath again. We laid him out on that extemal layer which was then taking on a clotted, 
slippery consistency. 

"Wrrak! This stuff closes on you!" Mr. Hnw tried to say, though he didn’t have a 
great gift for self-expression. "You go down and down, and you swallow! Skrrrack!" He 
spat. 

There was another novelty: if you weren’t careful, you could now sink on the 




nebula. My mother, with a mother's instinct, was the first to realize it. And she cried: 
"Children: are you all there? Where are you?" 

The truth was that we were a bit confused, and whereas before, when everything 
had been lying regularly for centuries, we were always careful not to scatter, now we had 
forgotten all about it. 

"Keep calm. Nobody must stray," my father said. 

"G'd(w) n ! Where are you? And the twins? Has anybody seen the twins? Speak 

up!" 

Nobody answered. "Oh, my goodness, they're lost!" Mother shouted. My little 
brothers weren't yet old enough to know how to transmit any message: so they got lost 
easily and had to be watched over constantly. "I'll go look for them!" I said. 

"Good for you, Qfwfq, yes, go!" Father and Mother said, then, immediately 
repentant: "But if you do go, you'll be lost, too! No, stay here. Oh, all right, go, but let us 
know where you are: whistle!" 

I began to walk in the darkness, in the marshy condensation of that nebula, 
emitting a constant whistle. I say "walk"; I mean a way of moving over the surface, 
inconceivable until a few minutes earlier, and it was already an achievement to attempt it 
now, because the matter offered such little resistance that, if you weren’t careful, instead 
of proceeding on the surface you sank sideways or even vertically and were buried. But 
in whatever direction I went and at whatever level, the chances of finding the twins 
remained the same: who could guess where the two of them had got to? 

All of a sudden I sprawled; as if they had — we would say today — tripped me up. 
It was the first time I had fallen, I didn't know what "to fall" was, but we were still on the 
softness and I didn't hurt myself. "Don't trample here," a voice said, "I don't want you to, 
Qfwfq." It was the voice of my sister G'd(w) n . 

"Why? What's there?" 

"I made some things with things. . ." she said. It took me a while to realize, 
groping, that my sister, messing about with that sort of mud, had built up a little hill, all 
full of pinnacles, spires, and battlements. 

"What have you done there?" 

G'd(w) n never gave you a straight answer. "An outside with an inside in it." 

I continued my walk, falling every now and then. I also stumbled over the 
inevitable Mr. Hnw, who was stuck in the condensing matter again, head-first. "Come, 

Mr. Hnw. Mr. Hnw! Can't you possibly stay erect?" and I had to help him pull himself out 
once more, this time pushing him from below, because I was also completely immersed. 

Mr. Hnw, coughing and puffing and sneezing (it had never been so icy cold 
before), popped up on the surface at the very spot where Granny Bb'b was sitting. Granny 
flew into the air, immediately overcome with emotion: "My grandchildren! My 
grandchildren are back!" 

"No, no, Mamma. Look, it's Mr. Hnw!" Everything was confused. 

"But the grandchildren?" 

"They're here!" I shouted, "and the cushion is here, too!" 

The twins must long before have made a secret hiding place for themselves in the 
thickness of the nebula, and they had hidden the cushion there, to play with. As long as 
matter had been fluid, they could float in there and do somersaults through the round 
cushion, but now they were imprisoned in a kind of spongy cream: the cushion's central 




hole was clogged up, and they felt crushed on all sides. 

"Hang on to the cushion," I tried to make them understand. "I'll pull you out, you 
little fools!" I pulled and pulled and, at a certain point, before they knew what was 
happening, they were already rolling about on the surface, now covered with a scabby 
film like the white of an egg. The cushion, instead, dissolved as soon as it emerged. There 
was no use trying to understand the phenomena that took place in those days; and there 
was no use trying to explain to Granny Bb'b. 

Just then, as if they couldn't have chosen a better moment, our visiting relatives 
got up slowly and said: "Well, it' s getting late; I wonder what our children are up to. 

We're a little worried about them. It' s been nice seeing all of you again, but we'd better be 
getting along." 

Nobody could say they were wrong; in fact, they should have taken fright and ran 
off long since; but this couple, perhaps because of the out-of-the-way place where they 
lived, were a bit gauche. Perhaps they had been on pins and needles all this time and 
hadn't dared say so. 

My father said: "Well, if you want to go, I won't try to keep you. But think it over: 
maybe it would be wiser to stay until the situation's cleared up a bit, because as things 
stand now, you don't know what sort of risk you might be running." Good, common 
sense, in short. 

But they insisted: "No, no, thanks all the same. It' s been a real nice get-together, 
but we won't intrade on you any longer," and more nonsense of the sort. In other words, 
we may not have understood very much of the situation, but they had no notion of it at 
all. 

There were three of them: an aunt and two uncles, all three very tall and 
practically identical; we never really understood which uncle was the husband and which 
the brother, or exactly how they were related to us: in those days there were many things 
that were left vague. 

They began to go off, one at a time, each in a different direction, toward the black 
sky, and every now and then, as if to maintain contact, they cried: "Oh! Oh!" They always 
acted like this: they weren't capable of behaving with any sort of system. 

They had hardly left when their cries of "Oh! Oh!" could be heard from very 
distant points, though they ought to have been still only a few paces away. And we could 
also hear some exclamations of theirs, whose meaning we couldn't understand: "Why, it' s 
hollow here!" "You can't get past this spot!" "Then why don't you come here?" "Where 
are you?" "Jump!" "Fine! And what do I jump over?" "Oh, but now we're heading back 
again!" In other words, everything was incomprehensible, except the fact that some 
enormous distances were stretching out between us and those relatives. 

It was our aunt, the last to leave, whose yells made the most sense: "Here I am, all 
alone, stuck on top of a piece of this stuff that's come loose. . ." 

And the voices of the two uncles, weak now in the distance, repeated: "Fool. . . 
Fool. . . Fool. . ." 

We were peering into this darkness, crisscrossed with voices, when the change 
took place: the only real, great change I've ever happened to witness, and compared to it 
the rest is nothing. I mean this thing that began at the horizon, this vibration which didn't 
resemble those we then called sounds, or those now called the "hitting" vibrations, or any 
others; a kind of eruption, distant surely, and yet, at the same time, it made what was 




close come closer; in other words, all the darkness was suddenly dark in contrast with 
something else that wasn't darkness, namely light. As soon as we could make a more 
careful analysis of the situation, it turned out that: flrst, the sky was dark as before but 
was beginning to be not so dark; second, the surface where we were was all bumpy and 
crusty, an ice so dirty it was revolting, which was rapidly dissolving because the 
temperature was rising at full speed; and, third, there was what we would later have 
called a source of light, that is, a mass that was becoming incandescent, separated from us 
by an enormous empty space, and it seemed to be trying out all the colors one by one, in 
iridescent fits and starts. And there was more: in the midst of the sky, between us and that 
incandescent mass, a couple of islands, brightly lighted and vague, which whirled in the 
void with our uncles on them and other people, reduced to distant shadows, letting out a 
kind of chirping noise. 

So the better part was done: the heart of the nebula, contracting, had developed 
warmth and light, and now there was the Sun. All the rest went on revolving nearby, 
divided and clotted into various pieces, Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and others farther on, 
and whoever was on them, stayed where he was. And, above all, it was deathly hot. 

We stood there, open-mouthed, erect, except for Mr. Hnw who was on all fours, to 
be on the safe side. And my grandmother! How she laughed! As I said before, Granny 
Bb'b dated from the age of diffused luminosity, and all through this dark time she had 
kept saying that any minute things would go back the way they had been in the old days. 
Now her moment seemed to have come; for a while she tried to act casual, the sort of 
person who accepts anything that happens as perfectly natural; then, seeing we paid her 
no attention, she started laughing and calling us: "Bunch of ignorant louts. . . Rnow- 
nothings. . ." 

She wasn't speaking quite in good faith, however; unless her memory by then had 
begun to fail her. My father, understanding what little he did, said to her, prudently as 
always: "Mamma, I know what you mean, but really, this seems quite a different 
phenomenon. . ." And he pointed to the terrain: "Look down!" he exclaimed. 

We lowered our eyes. The Earth which supported us was still a gelatinous, 
diaphanous mass, growing more and more firm and opaque, beginning from the center 
where a kind of yolk was thickening; but still our eyes managed to penetrate through it, 
illuminated as it was by that first Sun. And in the midst of this kind of transparent bubble 
we saw a shadow moving, as if swimming and flying. And our mother said: "Daughter!" 

We all recognized G'd(w) n : frightened perhaps by the Sun's catching fire, 
following a reaction of her shy spirit, she had sunk into the condensing matter of the 
Earth, and now she was trying to clear a path for herself in the depths of the planet, and 
she looked like a gold and silver butterfly as she passed into a zone that was still 
illuminated and diaphanous or vanished into the sphere of shadow that was growing 
wider and wider. 

"G'd(w) n ! G'd(w) n !" we shouted and flung ourselves on the ground, also trying to 
clear a way, to reach her. But the Earth's surface now was coagulating more and more into 
a porous husk, and my brother Rwzfs, who had managed to stick his head into a fissure, 
was alinost strangled. 

Then she was seen no more: the solid zone now occupied the whole central part of 
the planet. My sister had remained in there, and I never found out whether she had stayed 
buried in those depths or whether she had reached safety on the other side until I met her, 




much later, at Canberra in 1912, married to a certain Sullivan, a retired railroad man, so 
changed I hardly recognized her. 

We got up. Mr. Hnw and Granny were in front of us, crying, surrounded by pale 
blue-and-gold flames. 

"Rwzfs! Why have you set fire to Granny?" Father began to scold, but, turning 
toward my brother, he saw that Rwzfs was also enveloped in flames. And so was my 
father, and my mother, too, and I — we were all burning in the fire. Or rather: we weren't 
burning, we were immersed in it as in a darling forest; the flames shot high over the 
whole surface of the planet, a fiery air in which we could run and float and fly, and we 
were gripped by a kind of new joy. 

The Sun's radiations were buming the envelopes of the planets, made of helium 
and hydrogen: in the sky, where our uncles and aunt were, fiery globes spun, dragging 
after them long beards of gold and turquoise, as a comet drags its tail. 

The darkness came back. By now we were sure that everything that could 
possibly happen had happened, and "yes, this is the end," Grandmother said, "mind what 
us old folks say. . ." Instead, the Earth had merely made one of its turns. It was night. 
Everything was just beginning. 

